<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
    <!-- The above 3 meta tags *must* come first in the head; any other head content must come *after* these tags -->
    <meta name="description" content="">
    <meta name="author" content="">
    <link rel="icon" href="/favicon.ico">

	<title>Carl Myers' Blog - <!--#echo var = "posttitle" --></title>

    <!-- Bootstrap core CSS -->
    <link href="/bootstrap/css/bootstrap.min.css" rel="stylesheet">
    <!-- Bootstrap theme -->
    <link href="/bootstrap/css/bootstrap-theme.min.css" rel="stylesheet">

    <!-- Custom styles for this template -->
    <link href="/bootstrap/css/theme.css" rel="stylesheet">

    <!-- Just for debugging purposes. Don't actually copy these 2 lines!
    <script src="../../assets/js/ie8-responsive-file-warning.js"></script>
    <script src="bootstrap/js/ie-emulation-modes-warning.js"></script>
    -->

    <!-- HTML5 shim and Respond.js for IE8 support of HTML5 elements and media queries -->
    <!--[if lt IE 9]>
      <script src="https://oss.maxcdn.com/html5shiv/3.7.2/html5shiv.min.js"></script>
      <script src="https://oss.maxcdn.com/respond/1.4.2/respond.min.js"></script>
    <![endif]-->
  </head>

  <body role="document">

	<!-- include the nav bar -->
	<!--#set var = "page" value = "blog" -->
	<!--#include file="/nav.html" -->

    <div class="container theme-showcase" role="main">

      <div>

<h1><!--#echo var = "posttitle" --></h1>
<h2><!--#echo var = "postdate" --></h2>
# Objective Morality and The Moral Landscape
## September 29th, 2016

Secular morality is a subject I frequently find myself discussing online.  Surprising numbers of armchair theorists, whether religious or not, make assertions I'm not sure they truly understand or could justify.  Here are just a few:
* You can't get an 'ought' from an 'is'</li>
* Without some sort of creator or god, there can be no objective morality</li>
* If there was no objective morality, &lt;insert bad thing here&gt;, therefore, god exists</li>

My goal is always to hold as many true beliefs as possible, and as few false
ones.  For this reason, I try to make as few assumptions as possible.  I take
the minimum assumptions necessary as axioms, and then build as much knowledge
as possible on top of that.  Furthermore, most importantly, I continuously
search for evidence that my axioms are not an accurate description of reality
(either they aren't effective, or cause contradictions).  The longer I go
without finding such evidence, the more confident I can be that the knowledge
and beliefs I have based upon those assumptions are a true an accurate
reflection of reality.

Religion has long claimed to have a monopoly on morality.  Only via an
understanding of god, people claim, can we know right from wrong.  It is
because of the mark god left on our hearts, you see, that we know right from
wrong.  Some apologists such as William Lane Craig even go so far as to say god
is synonymous with good - if he orders it, it is good by definition.  Under
this view, murdering babies, raping women and children, and enslaving entire
races is all perfectly benevolent if and only if it is god's will.  Some of
humanity's greatest thinkers and philosophers, fortunately, have given us an
alternative with greater consistency, greater explanatory power, and superior
results.  This essay is going to discuss my own views, based heavily on those
of Sam Harris from his book "The Moral Landscape", in depth.  I believe what I
write here is an accurate reflection of Harris' arguments, and that he would
agree with this, but these views are based on **my** understanding of what
he and others have argued, and so they are my responsibility alone to defend.

## <h1>The Science of Morality</h1>

The science of morality can be built upon just two simple axioms.  Those axioms
are (1) some people have better lives than others, and (2) these differences
relate in some way to states of the brains of the sentient creatures living
them.  (Harris' "The Moral Landscape", p14).  To make these somewhat abstract
things more concrete, however, I will borrow a bit more of Harris' argument.
First, Harris presents "The Bad Life", which I summarize as "you are a young
widow who has lived her entire life in the midst of civil war, whose
seven-year-old daughter was raped and dismembered before your eyes, an act
perpetrated by your fourteen-year-old son who was goaded to this evil at the
point of a machete by a press gang of drug-addled soldiers, leading you to run
barefoot through the jungle with the killers in pursuit."  While this would
certainly be the worst day of your life, it is not entirely out of character
with the other days of your life, having experienced violence and cruelty
practically uninterrupted since your moment of birth.  Continuing to quote
Harris, "You have never learned to read, taken a hot shower, or traveled beyond
the green hell of the jungle.  Even the luckiest people you have known have
experienced little more than an occasional respite from chronic hunger, fear,
apathy, and confusion."  The imagery and detail here are important because it
is conducive to attempt to genuinely imagine what it would be like to live that
short, anemic life, instead of the life you are living now which is almost
certainly beyond comprehension to the people who live in the world we are
imagining, a life which someone somewhere likely has lived before.

Now, in stark contrast, I will summarize Harris' example of "The Good Life".
"You are married to the most loving, intelligent, and charismatic person you
have ever met.  Both of you have careers that are intellectually stimulating
and financially rewarding.  For decades, your wealth and social connections
have allowed you to devote yourself to activities that bring you immense
personal satisfaction. One of your greatest sources of happiness has been to
find creative ways to help people who have not had your good fortune in life,
and with your own finances and billion-dollar grants awarded to your foundation
you have changed the lives of millions of children in the developing world for
the better.  If asked, you would say you could not imagine how your time on
earth could have been better spent, and you and your closest friends will live
long and healthy lives, untouched by crime, disease, or other misfortunes."  As
Harris immediately points out, these examples are generic but real in the sense
that they represent lives that some human beings are likely to be leading at
this moment or some moment in the past or future.  And while you could probably
extend the examples to try to produce a worse or better life, they certainly
indicate the general range of experiences accessible, in principle, to most of
us.  I will now, just as Harris does, concede that if you don't see a
distinction between these two lives that is worth valuing - if you do not think
we can objectively say it is preferable to live one of these lives over the
other, or that if we could make it so no human ever had to live the bad life
ever again that would be an objectively good thing to do - if you cannot agree
with that, then I can scarcely imagine we have anything to talk about.

Now that we agree that some people live lives that are objectively better, or
worse, than others, and those lives are better or worse due to the brain states
available to those sentient beings, we can see how the science of morality
follows.  We can study brain states.  We can study the differences between
different lives.  There may be many different lives possible on the "moral
landscape" which are of equivalent, or indistinguishable flourishing or
suffering - equal peaks or troughs - but there can be no doubt that there exist
lives such as our examples above where the difference between them is so stark
it would be difficult to find an honest interlocutor who would doubt the
distinction.  This makes questions about how to create more "good lives" and
fewer "bad lives" for all the sentient beings currently alive also an objective
question, one to which proper investigation can proffer objective answers.

## Moral Solipsism

The principal objection levied against the science of morality is the inability
to obtain an "ought" from an "is".  Who says "good" is good?  Why is
flourishing preferable to suffering, some would ask?  How do I justify my
axioms?  This is where we come to what I call "moral solipsism".  In
epistemology, a solipsist is one who argues that only ones mind is sure to
exist, and for all we know, everything else we perceive is not real.  We could
be automatons, a simulation, a brain in a vat, or some other creature's dream.
Solipsism is an intellectual dead end - if you think you can't know anything
about reality, what is the point of anything?  It's like nihilism squared, but
for knowledge.  The fact is, without some starting assumptions, this result is
inescapable (known as "the problem of hard solipsism").  Most philosophers and
scientists reject hard solipsism by applying axioms such as "My senses, while
imperfect, at least occasionally reflect an objective reality which we all
share".  We could put this axiom in a recognizable pattern to see how well it
parallels the axioms of objective morality.  (1) There exists an objective
reality we all share and (2) our observations comport with this objective
reality frequently enough that the more observations we make, the better we can
understand it.

Notice that without these two base assumptions, we have solipsism.  We cannot
have any justified beliefs about the world we inhabit without these.  Yet,
scientists take no issue with this - people are happy to accept this simple,
reasonable assumptions.  Furthermore, if either of these assumptions were
mistaken, we would have a good chance of noticing.  We would expect our
observations to lead to inconsistencies which no theory of the universe can
square.  Or, our theories we did produce based upon our observations would fail
to work.  In a way, the fact that you are (almost certainly) reading this on an
electronic device which is a veritable mavel of modern engineering which would
not be possible if these axioms were not true, is telling.

Our assumptions in the field of moral science are no less reasonable, and also
no less testable.  Were we mistaken about any of these things, it would likely
become clear in the fullness of time, when our "moral theories" based upon
those assumptions lead to inconsistencies or contradictions, or simply don't
seem to work to produce a world with more flourishing and less suffering.  Just
like with science itself, the final adjudicator is whether or not it works.

## What is Flourishing?

First of all, if you really need to have a discussion about whether we want to
live in a world that maximizes suffering, or flourishing, you are welcome to do
so, but I am not interested in it.  What I am asserting is that the flourishing
experienced by sentient beings is linked to the brain states which are a part
of objective reality we all share.  As such, it is objective and can be
measured.  We might lack the technology to so do with precision today, we might
never be able to measure it perfectly, but that is no different from our
inability to directly observe quantum phenomenon - we can still see the impacts
of them, and have every reason to believe they are a real part of the objective
reality we share.  Flourishing may even be a complex multi-axis quantity, much
like the physical properties of matter include charge, spin, position,
velocity, etc.  This complexity does nothing to weaken the conclusion that
flourishing is still a objective, potentially-measurable quantity, and some
states of flourishing are simply preferable to others.

## Future Topics
* Objections? Link to Harris' blog
* implications of moral landscape - multiple equivalent spots possible
* Single happiest person in the universe versus billions of slightly-happy-people
